centralized planning functions for the state and
to assist communities were dismantled by the
succeeding governor. Who was? Who was? Who was the
next governor? Dolph, the evaporative. Dolph
Briscoe. Right, Dolph Briscoe, who spent very
little time being governor and apparently was
anti-planning. He certainly put together an
anti-planning staff. They
They also had some very undemocratic procedures
that they followed. I'm afraid it was very much of
the era of the old-time Texans, wherein you did
what you wanted with your stuff. They had a very
difficult time understanding that the federal
government had guidelines for the use of money
that people received from the federal
government. At any rate, I'm going to get through
the rest of my personal history kind of quickly so
we can talk about whatever else we need to talk
about planning. After I left Newhouse and Taylor,
I went to work with Carter Otscott, and the
planning that I did there was split into two sorts
of things. I did do a couple of comprehensive plans
that they sort of had left over from the days when
they thought that there was a value in the 701
program and still had a commitment to finish up.
They were at that point doing an enormous amount of
campus planning for major universities, which
are sort of a microcosm. They're an interesting
blend between a company town and a dictatorship.
Campuses are a dictatorship? Certainly are. And
who's the dictator varies a great deal from campus
to campus.
At any rate, the campus plans were very
interesting. They involved the communities into
them, some more than others. We wanted to do the
total thing together wherever it was possible to
do that. And
then a lot of planning oriented to large-scale
architectural projects.
some of which were the equivalent of cities in
themselves. In some cases, I spent three or four
days being the consultant to something that was
going to have a major impact on some city, a giant
new hospital complex, for instance. But at any
rate, I spent five or six years working there and
then joined Bernstaff.
I guess the other thing, the one thing that Vernon
would like to mention was that he was president of
the Gulf of Southwest chapter of AIP, which has now
been merged into APA. He was president when I
arrived in Texas in 1969, as I recall. He probably
was. Yes. He had been the Houston section
director. I've been the Houston section
director. I've been president of the Texas
chapter of AIP. I was also an officer in CPAP. which
is confined to people who are employed by cities in
Texas.
There have been a bunch of things that we have
worked on with other people to accomplish within
those organizations. One thing that I think that
was reasonably remarkable that I was involved in
along with one of the planners from the
Dallas-Fort Worth area was the writing of the
enabling legislation for regional planning
commissions, which we did as a part of our CPAT
activities and passed on to the Texas Municipal
League, who found the support for it and got it
passed. They, however, removed all of the, the
Texas Municipal League removed from our
recommendations before they passed on all of the
ability for taxation. that it wouldn't fly that
way oh date that's interesting well I suspect that
it was probably in the vicinity of 1964 but I don't
remember exactly when I think the regional
planning legislation was probably passed by the
65 legislature 63 or 65 in the early 60s
I don't know what else. I think that covers the
essential points of history so that you would
understand how my comments are during the period
of time that I worked at CRS. Virtually all the
things I did were in other parts of the United
States so that I had a five-year gap in my
association with Houston things and a good
comparison towards what was being done in other
parts of the country. And I observed, in general,
that when you compare things to a city like
Philadelphia, which at that point was touted to be
the great mecca of planning, I discovered that, in
my opinion, it was not. There were a lot of people
involved in functions that had planning
somewhere in their title. But what they were
mainly doing was jealously guarding their own
little bailiwick, and there was very little
cooperation going on. It took an enormous amount
of time and effort, most of which was
unproductive, to accomplish anything in
Philadelphia. Was that during the Ed Bacon
regime? Yes, it was during Ed Bacon's regime.
I think that the majority of the planning things
that were so highly... touted in Philadelphia
were, in fact, largely physical design elements
and didn't have a lot to do with some of the hardcore
basics of real planning. There is now a backlash in
the planning department because of that. And the
pendulum has swung to the other extreme,
unfortunately. Really? That is too bad. I have
documentation on this because of the book I'm
working on. And I'd hope to use Philadelphia as an
example of continuation of the comprehensive
planning process, but I'm afraid I cannot. That's
such a bad. One of the things that I was involved in
in Philadelphia had to do with Eastwick, which
must be one of the world's greatest planning
disasters. And as a part, just because I was
curious about it, I delved into some of the
background information scrunched up some of the
old reports, and I understood why it turned out to
be such a disaster. Did you meet Bill Grigsby? No.
Who had done the market feasibility study for
Eastwick? No. He was now the head of the planning
department at the University of Pennsylvania.
Uh-huh. I may have met him since, but I didn't meet
him
yet. OK, what else do you want to talk about? The
single biggest event that went on during the time
that I was president of the Texas chapter of AIB.
And you were elected in what year? I
have to count backwards. We're now in 81. 81.
Probably 1977,
so the merger was accomplished in 78. And
before that I was the Texas chapter secretary, and
before that I had been the Houston section
director. So I've really been on the executive
committee for a very long time.
The single biggest thing that happened while I was
president was the merger between AIP and ASCO. And
the consideration of that merger and the various
implications used up a lot of time at the chapter
level as well as the national level. It was very
difficult to keep ongoing programs and things
that we had decided that we wanted to accomplish as
a group going on while there was a consideration of
changing the entire nature of the organization. I
personally was opposed to the merger. And I have
discovered that a large number of people who are
very active within APA now, even at the national
level, were also opposed to it. Everybody has sort
of shrugged their shoulders and said, OK, we
decided to do it. And now we're going to do our best
to make it work. And I think most people are doing
their best to make it work. However, I will observe
that the net effect of what we did has little effect
at the chapter level other than to increase the
volume of membership. It has not increased the
number of active members. It has not changed the
active people. The new active people are still
coming from the same place as they were. There are
young people entering the profession or people
who have moved here from other parts of the state.
They are not civilians involved in planning. And
this, I have found, is generally true throughout
my district because I've talked to the presidents
of the various chapters in my district, so I don't
think we're atypical. Texas did have a smaller
percentage gain in membership than almost anyone
else. as the result of the merger. And I think that
pointed to something that we were maybe not aware
of, that a very high percentage of the people who
were active in planning in Texas were AIP members
of one category or another. We had an unusually
high. I think that part of that comes from our sheer
distances apart and our knowledge that we share
the same laws and the same problems. Most of our
cities are developing in the freeway era, and we do
have the same problems, and we had a great need to
communicate with each other about our problems
and offer our good solutions to each other. In
other parts of the country, people tended to be
much more insular in their outlook, that people
are flabbergasted that we could have a chapter
that, you know, is a thousand miles across and
however many miles in the other direction it is,
800 or so, and that we could actually work
together, but we do. At any rate, at the national
level, there continues to be a concern about
involving the citizens who are interested in
planning. And there continue to be New
suggestions, and mainly they're fairly feeble.
While people, the result of all the screaming in
the 60s about people being interested in planning
and how they should be interested in planning did
generate interest. People do attend public
hearings, although I would suggest that mostly
it's the negative interests that attend public
hearings. People, citizens, still are not
sufficiently interested in planning to commit
large blocks of time or money to learning more
about it, even if they have positions of some
considerable responsibility on local
commissions. And I think that regardless of what
we do at the national level, we've got to be
realistic and understand that we are primarily
going to be an organization of professional
planners. you asked about the net result on the
dues. For the person who was a full AIP member,
there's been very little effect on the dues.
You're paying about the same thing as you would
have been paying had AIP continued to exist.
Now I'd have to go back and look at the rate of
inflation and look at the old, I don't even
remember what associate AIP people were paying.
But I think the dues are generally about the same.
as they might have been.
Let me ask you a final question.
From your perception and knowledge of Houston,
what do you think should happen in the near future
in terms of planning in the greater Houston area?
What kinds of things should occur, structural or
otherwise?
Well, I think the most important thing that we've
got to recognize and come to grips with ways to
implement is that it is no longer possible for us to
be a single center town. even though our, quote,
downtown area is very active and healthy and
continuing to grow, that we have passed into a
category of cities more like Chicago and that we do
have to have sub-centers. And we need to do some
positive things to allow and promote these
sub-centers to happen effectively with the kind
of transportation networks, etc., In all of the
planning that's going on now, we're only talking
about serving sub-centers that already exist and
that have come into being without the benefit of
any formal assistance from a planning standpoint
from the governments. The medical center might be
the single exception to that. But we really need to
be looking at sub-centers that are further out.
Perhaps Katy, perhaps the Woodlands is one. But,
you know, we are merely continuing on our way with
our normal grid thoroughfare system. Works fine
if you have a residential neighborhood thing and
it's attendant commercial stuff. Doesn't work
too well, as we could prove with Galleria, when you
get a real center working, your transportation
network just collapses. I think there are a number
of, I think I know there are a number of people in
influential positions who are aware of that.
Vernon, who also neglected to mention this, was
part of a group of about 30 influential citizens,
including the presidents of all the major oil
companies, the mayor, the police chief, et
cetera, who spent a weekend retreat down at the
Tenneco-owned resort community down south and
west of town. And they did discuss the need for
sub-centers. No one can come to grips with the
problem, however, of whose property it's going to
be on. And I think that's the crux of the problem.
There have been comments about the role that the
planning department is taking at this time. Do you
think that should change? Certainly. The
planning department is sort of following along
licking at the heels of what's happening. And they
ought to be out there helping the people in the
forefront to do the right thing, to make the
change, to realize that Houston is transitioning
from one kind of a city into another. And they
really are not. We need some active leadership
within the department. I think that they usually
have the bright young minds who could think a lot of
the things if they had the sort of philosophical,
attitudinal things, directions and assistance.
And I think it isn't just the planning director
that they need real help from the mayor and the city
council. I would hope that. even though I was
afraid that the system of changing, the change
system of electing city council members would
turn out to be to the city's detriment. So far, it
seems that rather than being more of a pork barrel,
that is much less of a pork barrel, and that the
number of these councilmen who've been elected
from districts have much more compunction to
speak out about the needs of the city as a whole and
don't have the long-term vested interests by
certain money groups and sort of warp the older
councilman's thinking around. I mean we did after
this new council did after all these years finally
adopt the billboard ordinance that we fought for
gee I think I first joined billboards limited 12
years ago And we made drafts of ordinances. When
the first year I worked for CRS, I drafted a
billboard ordinance as a part of one of our civic
endeavor things through Billboards Inc. And it's
finally been passed. The chap who eased past John
Shanahan in the final runoff. Yes. Who I
understand is rather good. Yes, he has turned out
to be rather good. He may not have some of the same
credentials as John, but he certainly has some of
the same interests. And he's been very clever
about getting some things passed. I think we've
all been very surprised. At any rate, hopefully
this new group of councilmen could assist. But
somewhere, somebody's got to step up with the
leadership. And to me, at this point, it looks as if
it may have to come from the private sector.
We may be talking about having to get together a
group of prominent citizens. Well, I think the
West Houston Association is a good example of
what's happened as a result of the dearth of
planning. The West Houston Association was
formed by a small group of progressive developers
whose interests were mainly on the West Side, and
they saw that there was nothing going on out there.
A lot of it was from their own self-interest, but
they saw that things were not going on out there
that needed to go on. And they made their own
association and hired a planner to be director of
it, and they are filling some of the basic
informational and accomplishment things that
the Houston City Finance Department ought to be
doing. That should be tax supported. Well, I think
this particular group of developers really don't
care whether it's tax supported or not. They just
want it done. And they're probably willing to
support it. But it's a public responsibility,
though. It is a public responsibility. We're
fortunate that there are a bunch of guys who think
that they have a public responsibility and are
willing to be involved in it. But they're getting
roads built. They're pushing to get the parks
approved. It's reminiscent of the early days of
planning in Boston, and San Francisco, and so
forth, and New York, where the private interests,
philanthropic interests, funded regional plans
and regional planning programs, such as TELUS in
San Francisco, the Regional Plan Association in
New York, and Philane and Boston and so forth. It's
a pity that one has to make comments and see these
sorts of things happening in 1981. Yeah, it is.
Mary Lou, I know you've got a bunch of work hanging
fire. Let's try one more time, Margaret. Thank you
very much. Good afternoon. We are at the residence
of Ralph and Mrs. Ellefrit, and we are talking
about the role of Mr. Elefret in the initial days of
planning in Houston and on up through his
retirement from the planning department and
subsequent professional activities. Ralph,
would you like to begin?
One of my first activities when the planning
department was formed in March of
was to obtain some background on what had happened
in planning in the past.
The city government had just moved from the old
city hall, which was also the city market, into the
new building, which is now the main city hall with
the council chambers.
The only materials that I found were down in the
vault of the old City Hall scattered on the floor
some role plans
miscellaneous traffic counts that listed the
number of automobiles and the number of horse
drawn vehicles at certain points in the city and
quite a miscellaneous group of information
gradually by talking to others and
scouting around I did gain a little background and
apparently the first planning of course was the
original site of the city itself which extended
north from Texas Avenue to the bio and six blocks on
either side of the of Main Street to the east and
west,
which was laid out as the original town site in 1836
by the Allen brothers. And this was truly perhaps
the most remarkable important planning that has
been done in Houston because it gave the downtown
area a base of regular streets all 80 feet wide
except Maine which is 90 and
it provided a block for the county courthouse and a
block for public buildings where the old city hall
was located and
has this pattern which was expanded south
and also to the east and west for a reasonable
distance now includes all of the of the real
central business district and it has served
extremely well in with the smaller blocks and the
wide streets to to handle the growing density of
the city. And this was a real auspicious
beginning. But of course, beyond this general
pattern, the city grew rather wildly. Most cities
are planted on north-south and east-west
orientations. And the original Allen Brothers
subdivision seems to be at an angle from that. Is
there some reason for that? The tradition is that
the angle to get the breeze, I really think that is
somebody's imagination. I think that really the
alignment of the bow had something to do with it.
And perhaps even the shape of the
piece of the original track. But
beyond the old general pattern of the downtown
area, since
the land ownerships were by meets and bounds and
not according to townships and ranges in any
regular pattern,
there were many developments
at various angles where the streets made bad
connections and so forth. Now the next jump in
planning came during the latter part of what was
the City Beautiful era before the before World War
I.
In around 1910 to 1913 it appeared that many cities
were driven by an impetus of civic design and civic
development. It was the end of the city beautiful
era which was just apparently hitting in Texas
both Dallas and Houston became interested in
planning.
In 1912
the city government of Houston employed Arthur
Comey who was then a young professor from Harvard
to come to Houston and prepare a plan and study. And
he did this and the report was published in 1913.
It was a remarkable study in many respects even
though following this report we find practically
no evidence of planning or interest in planning
until 1922
His proposals for large parks included a site
almost identical to Memorial Park
in the exact location of what became Herman Park.
And he had several alternate locations for a civic
center, one of which is where the present civic
center is located.
And even though the many
years elapsed and the plan was in a sense
forgotten, I'm sure that he implanted ideas and
thoughts in people's minds that carried over into
the many improvements and important
developments that were later realized.
One of the interesting things about the Comey
Report was the accuracy of his population
projections from a city of 80,000 to a city of over
500,000. He took these cities, older and larger
cities of the United States, that had access to
deep water and
put their population on a graph at the point that
Houston was at that time, about 80,000. Then he
projected up a mean line through the growth of
those cities which had already occurred
to propose a future growth of Houston. His 1950
population came out very close to the population
that
was found in the 1950 census.
I had the pleasure of meeting Arthur Comey at a
planning conference in Detroit in the early 50s.
He was then an elderly man, was no longer teaching,
but fortunately he said that he had a number of
copies of the report, none of which were available
in Houston at the time. And so he sent us some copies
of the report and these are now available in the
planning department.